---
title: In defense of burning fossil fuels to support cryptoart
date: 2021-01-21
---

Dr. Memo Akten recently published [a scathing analysis](https://memoakten.medium.com/the-unreasonable-ecological-cost-of-cryptoart-2221d3eb2053) of the carbon cost of Ethereum transactions. He was specifically evaluating Ethereum in the context of buying and selling digital art using non-fungible tokens (NFTs) on platforms like Rarible and OpenSea. His math suggests the average NFT sale requires around 340 kWh and 211 KgCO2, which is equivalent to the average EU citizen's electric usage for a month, which is crazy. Some people dispute the specifics of Memo's numbers, but it is directionally correct: blockchains in 2021 are extremely energy-intensive and wasteful. 

Because of this, Memo suggests entirely boycotting blockchains. 

I'd argue the opposite, and I encourage him and others to continue exploring crypto. 

I believe these high carbon costs are temporary, and outweighed by the potential long-term technical and societal benefits of blockchains. These projects are also open-source and community-driven, and benefit from the direct involvement of folks like Dr. Atken, who is both technically-adept and cares about building ethical systems. Opting-out only serves to reinforce the status quo.

1. As Memo mentions, the carbon footprint of Ethereum will drop by multiple orders of magnitude as Proof-of-Stake and ETH2.0 roll out over the next year or two. I wish I could share similar timelines for the electrification of our cars and shipping fleets, which represent [30% of US carbon emissions](https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/sources-greenhouse-gas-emissions). I will not try to defend Bitcoin, whose development has stagnated and will likely be stuck on PoW forever.
2. If you are looking for reasons to opt-out, I have many other shortcomings you could also mention: claiming a free NFT cost me $20 in gas fees; the transaction speed is still hilariously slow; explaining the benefits of crypto to a layperson is nearly impossible; the tools for both users and developers are lackluster; there are tons of scams and shiesters in the space; I can go on. If the system were perfect we'd all be using it already.
3. These projects are open-source and community-driven, and they need smart people who want to make them better. Opting out only serves to cement the priorities of incumbents. If you see the potential of crypto but are trying to minimize your carbon footprint, you should encourage your fellow artists to build on more effiicient platforms like Solana, Algorand, Cardano, and others that are already using proof-of-stake.
4. Lastly, I believe crypto in general represents one of the most signficant anti-corporate power-shifts we've seen in decades. Bitcoin is over 10 years old and has proven to be a robust and trustworthy financial system that exists independently of any government or corporation. DeFi is an entire alternative system for lending and borrowing money, divorced from banks and credit agencies; anyone with less-than-perfect credit scores or who is running a business that has trouble getting loans should be excited about that. Likewise, cryptoart and NFTs present a new creative medium for designing how artists and collectors interact, and a promising opportunity for artists to make a livlihood. Crypto and the ownership economy is a big deal. Anybody interested in breaking corporate monopolies and building new, more-equitable systems should be watching this space closely. Blockchains represent a way to create new, purposefully-designed systems that are owned by their users instead of by governments and corporations. I believe the benefits of systems like this are worth the temporary carbon costs. 

